DOCS-802: Update the setup flow on the Micro-RDK documentation for Viam Canon utility (#1499)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/_index.md

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install Rust

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

### Using Canon to build micro-rdk

[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.
Canon requires a working installation of docker.
[Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.

> If you are running linux, make sure to go through the post installation [steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Docker on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

#### Install the Rust ESP Toolchain and Activate the ESP-RS Virtual Environment

First install the following tools with `cargo` :

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

Finally to download and install the esp-rs toolchain run :

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

> To to avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
```

You can configure your robot using the config tab.

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
As of the time this guide is written the esp32 board component doesn't exist yet on app.viam.com below you can find the board template for esp32:

```json
{
  "attributes": {
    "webhook": "", // Optional path a webhook see https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template for an example
    "webhook-secret": "", // Option webhook secret
    "pins": [ // pin to be configured as Input/Ouput (for Get/SetGpio)
      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "34", // analog pins
        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /alert %}}

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git) to create a new micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git
```

> If you would like, you can use `mkdir` to initialize a new repository in the directory you created by running `cargo-generate`, to track any changes you make to the generated project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To track any changes you make to the generated project with Git, initialize a new repository inside of the directory you created by running `cargo-generate` by running `mkdir`. 
```
Is this what you mean here? This phrasing might be easier to parse

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.

To obtain this, navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab of your robot.

> The Micro-RDK uses the config for communication with the Viam app.

Reviewer: Sorry as this might just be my misunderstanding- what does this sentence mean? config is sent to the app bc the robot needs a config file?

Author: This files contains the secret needed for the esp32 to connect to app.viam.com

> The Micro-RDK uses the config for communication with the Viam app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
```

> Paste this into your terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste your JSON config into your terminal when prompted.
```

> {{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}
```

> All of the generated files should be safe to commit as a project on Github, with the exception of `viam.json`, since it contains a secret key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers
# SMEs: Nicolas Menard
---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Hardware Requirements

You need an an Espressif ESP32 microcontroller to use the micro-RDK.
Viam recommends purchasing the ESP32 with a development board: see [development kit options](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits).

Minimal configuration: 384kB Ram 4MB flash
Recommended configuration: 384kB Ram + 8MB SPIRAM + 4MB Flash

## Software Requirements

The micro-RDK is written in Rust.

We recommend using Viam's [Canon utility](#using-canon) to build the `micro-rdk` server, as the utility downloads and installs a Docker development environment automatically.
You can set up the development environment manually by following [these instructions](#set-up-development-environment-manually).

To use the micro-RDK with your ESP32 board, follow these steps:

- [Install prerequisites](#install-prerequisites)

If using the Docker environment with Canon:

- [Use Canon](#using-canon)

If setting up the environment yourself (Optional):

- [Set up development environment manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)

> The following instructions cover installation for macOS and Linux machines.

Reviewer 2: as opposed to on the ESP32? I think this could do with a bit more guidance

Author: I changed machine to systems, the esp32 cannot host any of this tools but we need them to program the esp32. I have added a sentence in that spirit

### Install prerequisites

> To build the micro-rdk, you must install the following software on your machine:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build the micro-rdk, you must install the following software on your development machine:
```

#### Install dependencies

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo apt-get install git libssl-dev dfu-util libusb-1.0-0 libudev-dev
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install Rust

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

> See [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.
```

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

> ### Using Canon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use Canon to set your development environment up
```
Is that accurate? If not please change but let's be a bit more precise with the headline

> Canon is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.
> See [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.
```

> It needs  a working installation of docker, follow [Docker Installation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) to install Docker. If running linux make sure to go throught the post installation [steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Canon requires a working installation of docker.
[Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running linux, make sure to go through the post installation [steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).
```

> #### Homebrew

Reviewer 2: This needs more guidance. Also how do I install it without homebrew? We didn't mention that as a prerequisite

Author: I have spilt it between macOS and Linux so it's a bit more clear about what to do.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

> #### Direct Install

Reviewer 2: Do I need to do both homebrew and direct install - we need more explanation /guidance here

Author: see above

Go 1.19 or newer must be installed.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

> Make sure your GOBIN is in your PATH. If not, you can add it with something like: `export PATH="$PATH:~/go/bin"` Note: This path may vary. See [Go](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install) for details.

Reviewer 2: Go binary?

### Set up development environment manually

> These steps are optional if you are using the canon utility to build micro-rdk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These steps are optional if you are using the canon utility to build the micro-rdk.
```

Author: done

---
title: "Microcontroller Setup: the Micro-RDK"
linkTitle: "Microcontroller Setup"
weight: 50
no_list: true
type: docs
image: "installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"
imageAlt: "E S P 32 - espressif"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"]
description: "Set up the Espressif ESP32 with the micro-RDK."
aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers
# SMEs: Nicolas Menard
---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

> To install and build the `micro-rdk` on your ESP32 board, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:
```

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-docker-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)
3. [Install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk)

### Hardware Requirements

You need an an Espressif ESP32 microcontroller to use the micro-RDK.
Viam recommends purchasing the ESP32 with a development board: see [development kit options](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits).

- **Minimal configuration:** 384kB Ram 4MB flash
- **Recommended configuration:** 384kB Ram + 8MB SPIRAM + 4MB Flash

### Software Requirements

The micro-RDK is written in Rust.
To be able to program the ESP32 on macOS and Linux systems, you must install the following software on your development machine:

#### Install Homebrew

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

> #### Install Build Dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Install Dependencies
```

mkdir -p ~/esp
cd ~/esp
git clone --depth 1 -b v4.4.4 --single-branch --recurse-submodules --shallow-submodules https://github.com/npmenard/esp-idf
```

Then, install the required tools for ESP-IDF:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cd ~/esp/esp-idf
./install.sh esp32
```

To activate ESP-IDF, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

{{% /expand%}}

{{%expand "Install the Rust ESP Toolchain and Activate the ESP-RS Virtual Environment" %}}

First install the following tools with `cargo` :

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

> Finally to download and install the esp-rs toolchain run :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP Rust development framework.

{{% /expand%}}

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot in your desired location.
Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default, and skip the instructions in the **Setup** tab for now as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.
You can configure your robot using the config tab.

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}

> As of the time this guide is written the esp32 board component doesn't exist yet on app.viam.com below you can find the board template for esp32:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The`esp32` model of [board component](/components/board/) is not yet provided for you in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Configure an `esp32` board as follows:
```

```json
{
  "attributes": {
    "webhook": "", // Optional path a webhook see https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template for an example
    "webhook-secret": "", // Option webhook secret

>     "pins": [ // pin to be configured as Input/Ouput (for Get/SetGpio)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "pins": [ // pin to be configured as Input/Output for GPIO Pin API Get/SetGpio
```

  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /alert %}}

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git) to create a new micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git
```

To track any changes you make to the generated project with Git, use the `mkdir` command to initialize a new repository inside of the directory you created by running `cargo-generate`.

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.

To obtain this, navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab of your robot.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Paste your JSON config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

### Upload and Connect to your ESP32 Board

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="Using Canon" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab name="Use Canon" %}}
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
make flash-esp32-bin
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Local environment" %}}

Make sure you have run `. ~/dev/esp/export-rs.sh` and `. ~/dev/esp/esp-idf/export.sh` before running the following command:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
make upload
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> If successful you will retain a serial connection to the board until `Ctrl-C` is pressed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If successful, you will retain a serial connection to the board until you press `Ctrl-C`.
```

. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP Rust development framework.

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

* Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
* Skip the instructions in the [**Setup** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#setup), as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.
* Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.

### Configure an `esp32` Board

{{< alert title="Info" color="info" >}}
The`esp32` [board](/components/board/) model is not currently provided for you as an option in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com), so you cannot use the **Config Builder** to configure this board.
{{< /alert >}}

To add an `esp32` board, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and select **Raw JSON** mode.

> Copy the following JSON template and paste it into your configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy the following JSON template.
Paste into your configuration inside of the`"components": []` object:
```

Reviewer: @mattjperez Do you think this would be sufficient to direct people? I can also include what's going to be autogenerated in the JSON, if you think that would be better!

Reviewer 3: I think a complete JSON file they can drop into the Raw JSON field will be the best approach for now as even how to add an `esp32` board component via the builder isn't obvious since it requires typing into a drop-down box.

Keeping the original wording and using this json would be the most straight forward I think.
```json
{
  "components": [
    {
      "attributes": {
        "pins": [
          15
        ],
        "analogs": [
          {
            "name": "soil",
            "pin": "34"
          }
        ]
      },
      "depends_on": [],
      "name": "board",
      "type": "board",
      "model": "esp32"
    }
  ]
}
```

Reviewer 4: I disagree. Complete Raw JSON should be avoided at all costs by users. I don't see anything in this config that would warrant Raw JSON.
Typing the the model "esp32" and populating just the attributes in the normal config builder is a pretty standard flow for advanced configs. That's the modular components experience for example.

Reviewer 3: Should the instructions be made into two steps then?
1) add `esp32` board using builder 
2) add `{ "pins": [15] }` to the new board's attributes using the new board's menu

Reviewer 4: Yes

Reviewer 4: Spoke with @npentrel offline. She pointed out that we have raw json for all other components on the docs site. I don't like it, but I think consistency is more important.

aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers
# SMEs: Nicolas Menard
---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)
3. [Install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk) and [create](#create-a-new-robot) and [connect to](#connect-to-your-esp32) a new robot

### Hardware Requirements

You need an an Espressif ESP32 microcontroller to use the micro-RDK.
Viam recommends purchasing the ESP32 with a development board: see [development kit options](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits).

- **Minimal configuration:** 384kB Ram 4MB flash
- **Recommended configuration:** 384kB Ram + 8MB SPIRAM + 4MB Flash

### Software Requirements

The micro-RDK is written in Rust.
To be able to program the ESP32 on macOS and Linux systems, you must install the following software on your development machine:

#### Install Homebrew

> ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Install Dependencies

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo apt-get install git libssl-dev dfu-util libusb-1.0-0 libudev-dev
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't already, run the following command to install Homebrew:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Then, install `dfu-util`:
```

curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

## Set up your development enviroment

### Use Viam's Canon CLI utility

[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.

Canon requires a working installation of Docker.

[Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

> Go 1.19 or newer must be installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`. 
```

> Go 1.19 or newer must be installed.

Reviewer: done!

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install).

### Set up development environment manually

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
You only need to follow these steps if you are not using Canon to build the micro-RDK.

> If you have completed [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#use-viams-canon-cli-utility), skip this section and begin on [install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk).

Reviewer: ok!

> If you have completed [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#use-viams-canon-cli-utility), skip this section and begin on [install the Micro-RDK](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#install-the-micro-rdk).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have completed [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#use-viams-canon-cli-utility), skip this section and begin on [install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk).
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP Rust development framework.

{{% /expand%}}

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

- Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.

> - Skip the instructions in the [**Setup** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#setup) for now, as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.

Reviewer: Ah that makes sense, thanks!

- Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.

### Configure an `esp32` Board

> {{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

Reviewer: ok, addressed

The`esp32` model of [board](/components/board/) is not currently provided for you as an option in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com), so you cannot use the **Config Builder** to configure this board.
{{< /alert >}}

To add an `esp32` board, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy the following JSON template and paste it into your configuration:

{{< tabs name="Configure an esp32 Board" >}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template"%}}

```json
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      <int>
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "<number>", 
        "name": "<your-analog-name>"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "<your-board-name>",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {

>     "pins": [ // pin number of the GPIO pin you want to use with GPIOPin API 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "pins": [
```

      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {

>         "pin": "34", // analog pins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "pin": "34",
```

        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.

Reviewer: Haha yes done!

The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `pins` | object | Required | The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pin-number" text="pin number" >}} of any GPIO pins you wish to use as input/output with the [`GPIOPin` API](/program/apis/#gpio-pins). |
| `analogs` | object | Optional | Attributes of any pins that can be used as analog-to-digital converter (ADC) inputs. See [configuration info](/components/board/#analogs). |

> <!-- | `webhook` | string | Optional | A webhook's URL. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |

Reviewer: @npentrel I have commented these attributed out here and in the template after talking with Matt Vella & Matt Perez (engineering intern who owns the webhook config  project). Apparently it's meant to be implemented fully by the fleet team and is only intended for internal use ATM

| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. | -->

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git) to create a new micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git
```

> To track any changes you make to the generated project with Git, use the `mkdir` command to initialize a new repository inside of the directory you created by running `cargo-generate`.

Reviewer: I'd be happy to remove, and yeah I have been confused on the intention of this step

> You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.

Reviewer: Sorry am confused here-- isn't it under the right command? I could move the command to afterwards. That flow would still be awkward though, as they would need to go back and forth

To obtain this:

- Navigate to [your new robot's](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#create-a-new-robot) page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
- Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> - Paste your JSON config into your terminal when prompted.

Reviewer: ok!

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

### Connect to your ESP32

Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Use Canon" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
make flash-esp32-bin
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Local environment" %}}

Make sure you have run `. ~/dev/esp/export-rs.sh` and `. ~/dev/esp/esp-idf/export.sh` before running the following command:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
make upload
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> If successful, you will retain a serial connection to the board until you press `Ctrl-C`.

Reviewer: I'm not picky between either but couldn't it be retain like keep it?

> If successful, you will retain a serial connection to the board until you press `Ctrl-C`.

Reviewer: Bc that command terminates

---
title: "Microcontroller Setup: the Micro-RDK"
linkTitle: "Microcontroller Setup"
weight: 50
no_list: true
type: docs
image: "installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"
imageAlt: "E S P 32 - espressif"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"]
description: "Set up the Espressif ESP32 with the micro-RDK."
aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers

# SMEs: Nicolas Menard

---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)
3. [Install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk) and [create](#create-a-new-robot) and [connect to](#connect-to-your-esp32) a new robot

### Hardware Requirements

> You need an an Espressif ESP32 microcontroller to use the micro-RDK.

Reviewer: done

> Viam recommends purchasing the ESP32 with a development board: see [development kit options](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/devkits).

Reviewer: done!

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

## Set up your development enviroment

### Use Viam's Canon CLI utility

[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker-based canonical environment.

Canon requires a working installation of Docker.

[Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab name="macOS" %}}

Reviewer 4: I don't know if there's a step missing here or in the canon README.
When I followed these steps I got the "no profile found that contains...." error. https://viaminc.slack.com/archives/C04TJK43WA0/p1681731623189309. Not sure what steps we need to document here for the general public. @Otterverse thoughts?

Reviewer 4: Nevermind...I think I was just not in the right directory. Leaving this comment for confirmation...

Reviewer 5: Yeah, you'll need to be in the project folder that's generated (later on) with the cargo generate step, that pulls down the template repo https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template

Canon wants to see a `.canon.yaml` at or above your current working directory, and uses that to determine the "root" of your project, and thus what image(s) to run and what folders to map, and that file comes from the template repo.

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install).

> Run `$ export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin` to do this, and verify your `GOPATH` with `go env GOPATH`.

Reviewer: Ok, thank you-- there would need to be more detailed instructions to add to path persistently right? I get confused on this every time I come across this, so if we do add these in here I will ping you for help

> Run `$ export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin` to do this, and verify your `GOPATH` with `go env GOPATH`.

Reviewer 2: You would need to add this instruction to your `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc` or whatever else file you use that runs when the a new shell is opened. But I think as is is enough

sudo apt-get install git wget flex bison gperf python3 python3-pip python3-venv cmake ninja-build ccache libffi-dev libssl-dev dfu-util libusb-1.0-0
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install cmake ninja dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install and Activate the ESP-IDF

Clone Viam's fork of the ESP-IDF, the development framework for Espressif SoCs (System-on-Chips) supported on Windows, Linux and macOS:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
mkdir -p ~/esp
cd ~/esp
git clone --depth 1 -b v4.4.4 --single-branch --recurse-submodules --shallow-submodules https://github.com/npmenard/esp-idf
```

Then, install the required tools for ESP-IDF:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cd ~/esp/esp-idf
./install.sh esp32
```

To activate ESP-IDF, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.

> Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

Reviewer: done!

cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP Rust development framework.

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

* Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
* Skip the instructions in the [**Setup** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#setup), as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.

> * Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.

Reviewer 4: This is not needed if we're telling them to skip the Setup page.
Nit (feel free to ignore me): On the 2nd bullet point, I think it's better to tell people to proceed to the Config tab rather than telling them to skip Setup.

Reviewer: Done!

> ### Configure an `esp32` Board

Reviewer 4: [non-blocking] This doesn't belong here. This step is not needed to flash the esp32...board configuration should be in a separate section/page. Just like we have different pages for flashing + configuring the rpi. Can do this as a follow up when we iterate on these steps.

Reviewer: Making a note of this to address in follow up ticket + adding info to board page

{{< /alert >}}

To add an `esp32` board, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy the following JSON template and paste it into your configuration:

{{< tabs name="Configure an esp32 Board" >}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template"%}}

```json
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      <int>
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "<number>", 
        "name": "<your-analog-name>"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "<your-board-name>",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "34",
        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.
Click **Save config**.
The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |

> | `pins` | object | Required | The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pin-number" text="pin number" >}} of any GPIO pins you wish to use as input/output with the [`GPIOPin` API](/program/apis/#gpio-pins). |

Reviewer 4: @npmenard Is this only required if accessing pins through the Board API? or do entries also need to be here for if a motor is being configured on these gpio pins?

Author: only for pins accessed as GPIO

| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The robot secret for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. | -->

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the Micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git) to create a new Micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git
```

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.
To obtain this:

* Navigate to [your new robot's](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#create-a-new-robot) page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Paste the `viam-server` config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

> ### Connect to your ESP32

Reviewer 4: "Connect" isn't the right word here. Flash/Upload viam-server to the ESP32?

Reviewer: addressed, this is a big improvement

> Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com):

Reviewer 4: "through the viam app" doesn't make sense here

Reviewer: Done, thank you!

Reviewer 2: I think that's not done actually

Reviewer: @npentrel Ahh I was confused here, sorry! see change now

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="Use Canon" %}}

Reviewer 4: pre-requisite step: make sure docker is running. prior steps only told you to ensure that it is installed.

Reviewer: @npentrel Think I have addressed above w/ redirect to post install and start

> ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

Reviewer 4: cd into the new directory -- `cd <project name>`

> canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"

Reviewer 4: could be me...but i can't past this step on the macos:
```
14:26 $ canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
Started new container: canon-viam-micro-rdk-acc408ce
Error: http: invalid Host header
```

Author: know bug see https://viaminc.slack.com/archives/C04TJK43WA0/p1689263776131489 fix exist should be merged in the short term so unsure we should mentioned it 
run `docker run -it --rm --user testbot -v "${PWD}:/host" [ghcr.io/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-dev-env:amr64](http://ghcr.io/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-dev-env:amr64) bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"` in the mean time

Author: replace arm64 by amd64 if on x86

Reviewer 4: perfect. thank you.
yeah, not sure if we should mention it, but it's also very needed for anyone trying today.

Reviewer 5: Docker JUST (an hour ago) released a new version to fix the bug, and I'll be updating canon to use it soon. Hopefully should be no need to mention it in docs.

> make flash-esp32-bin

Reviewer 4: this is redundant if the above passes the -c parameter

Author: no it requires access to USB devices, Mac doesn't let us bind usb devices to container

Reviewer 4: i misread...build/flash difference.

---
title: "Microcontroller Setup: the Micro-RDK"
linkTitle: "Microcontroller Setup"
weight: 50
no_list: true
type: docs
image: "installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"
imageAlt: "E S P 32 - espressif"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"]
description: "Set up the Espressif ESP32 with the micro-RDK."
aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers
# SMEs: Nicolas Menard
---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)

> 2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-docker-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)
```

        "name": "<your-analog-name>"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "<your-board-name>",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {
    "webhook": "", 
    "webhook-secret": "", 
    "pins": [ // pin to be configured as Input/Ouput 
      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "34", // analog pins
        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.
The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `pins` | object | Required | The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pin-number" text="pin number" >}} of any GPIO pins you wish to use as input/output with the [`GPIOPin` API](/program/apis/#gpio-pins). |
| `analogs` | object | Optional | Attributes of any pins that can be used as analog-to-digital converter (ADC) inputs. See [configuration info](/components/board/#analogs). |

> | `webhook` | string | Optional | Path to a webhook. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `webhook` | string | Optional | A webhook's URL. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |
```

> | `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | A webhook's secret. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |
```

> | `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key of a configured `webhook`. |
```

cargo install ldproxy
```

To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP Rust development framework.

{{% /expand%}}

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

- Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
- Skip the instructions in the [**Setup** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#setup) for now, as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.
- Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.

### Configure an `esp32` Board

> {{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< alert title="Info" color="info" >}}
```

The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `pins` | object | Required | The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pin-number" text="pin number" >}} of any GPIO pins you wish to use as input/output with the [`GPIOPin` API](/program/apis/#gpio-pins). |
| `analogs` | object | Optional | Attributes of any pins that can be used as analog-to-digital converter (ADC) inputs. See [configuration info](/components/board/#analogs). |
<!-- | `webhook` | string | Optional | A webhook's URL. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |
| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. | -->

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git) to create a new micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git
```

> To track any changes you make to the generated project with Git, use the `mkdir` command to initialize a new repository inside of the directory you created by running `cargo-generate`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
- Paste your JSON config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

### Connect to your ESP32

Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Use Canon" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
make flash-esp32-bin
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Local environment" %}}

Make sure you have run `. ~/dev/esp/export-rs.sh` and `. ~/dev/esp/esp-idf/export.sh` before running the following command:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
make upload
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

If successful, you will retain a serial connection to the board until you press `Ctrl-C`.
To manage this connection, consider running it within a dedicated terminal session, or under `tmux` or `screen`.
While the serial connection is live, you can also restart the currently flashed image with `Ctrl-R`.

> Your should now be able to connect to your ESP-32 backed robot live on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to your new robot's page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
If successful, *Live** should be displayed underneath **Last online**. 
```

{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      <int>
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "<number>", 
        "name": "<your-analog-name>"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "<your-board-name>",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "34",
        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.
Click **Save config**.
The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `pins` | object | Required | The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pin-number" text="pin number" >}} of any GPIO pins you wish to use as input/output with the [`GPIOPin` API](/program/apis/#gpio-pins). |
| `analogs` | object | Optional | Attributes of any pins that can be used as analog-to-digital converter (ADC) inputs. See [configuration info](/components/board/#analogs). |

> <!-- | `webhook` | string | Optional | A webhook's URL. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- | `webhook` | string | Optional | A webhook's URL. See [GitHub](viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. |
```

> | `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. | -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `webhook-secret` | string | Optional | The secret key for a configured `webhook`. See [GitHub](viam-labs/webhook-template) for an example. | -->
```

cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your .bashrc or .zshrc is not recommended.
Instead, save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

{{< /alert >}}

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

* Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
* Navigate to the **Config** tab.

> ### Configure an `esp32` Board

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure an esp32 board
```

If you haven't already, complete Docker's [Linux post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/) to set up Docker to run whenever your system boots up.

Use [the Micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git) to create a new Micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git
```

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.
To obtain this:

* Navigate to [your new robot's](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#create-a-new-robot) page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Click on the **Setup** tab.
Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.
* Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Paste the `viam-server` config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

> ### Connect to your ESP32

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Upload the Micro-RDK to your ESP32
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git
```

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.
To obtain this:

* Navigate to [your new robot's](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#create-a-new-robot) page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Click on the **Setup** tab.
Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.
* Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Paste the `viam-server` config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

### Upload the Micro-RDK to your ESP32

Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com):

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Use Canon" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

> canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cd <your-path-to/your-project-directory>
canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
```

```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

### Set up your development enviroment

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Canon CLI (recommended)" %}}

[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker-based canonical environment.

Canon requires a working installation of Docker Engine.

[Install Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker Engine on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/) to run Docker automatically on startup.

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab name="Linux" %}}
```

---
title: "Microcontroller Setup: the Micro-RDK"
linkTitle: "Microcontroller Setup"
weight: 50
no_list: true
type: docs
image: "installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"
imageAlt: "E S P 32 - espressif"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"]
description: "Set up the Espressif ESP32 with the micro-RDK."
aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers

# SMEs: Nicolas Menard

---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)

> 2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) manually or with Viam's Canon CLI utility *(recommended)* 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) manually or with Viam's Canon CLI utility *(recommended)*
```

sudo apt-get install git libssl-dev dfu-util libusb-1.0-0 libudev-dev
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

If you haven't already, install Homebrew:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Then, install `dfu-util`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install `Rust`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

> ## Set up your development enviroment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up your development enviroment
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Canon CLI (recommended)" %}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[Install Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker Engine on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/) to run Docker automatically on startup.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/doc/gopath_code) by running:
`export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Manual" %}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

If you haven't already, install Homebrew:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Then, install `dfu-util`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install `Rust`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

## Set up your development enviroment

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Canon CLI (recommended)" %}}

> ### Use Viam's Canon CLI utility

Reviewer 2: I think these headings are now no longer needed
```suggestion
```

[Install Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker Engine on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/) to run Docker automatically on startup.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/doc/gopath_code) by running:
`export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Manual" %}}

> ### Set up development environment manually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
You only need to follow these steps if you are not using Canon to build the micro-RDK.

If you have completed your [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#use-viams-canon-cli-utility), skip this section and continue to [install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk).

{{< /alert >}}

> To set up the Docker development environment for ESP manually, complete the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set up the Docker development environment for ESP manually, complete the following instructions:
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

To download and install the esp-rs toolchain, run:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your .bashrc or .zshrc is not recommended.
Instead, save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

{{< /alert >}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

## Install the Micro-RDK

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new robot](/manage/fleet/robots/#add-a-new-robot) in your desired location.

> * Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
> * Navigate to the **Config** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click on the name of the robot to go to the robot's page.
Then, navigate to the **Config** tab.
```
No need for bullet points anymore I think

 
 Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.
 -->

To add an `esp32` board, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy the following JSON template and paste it into your configuration:

{{< tabs name="Configure an esp32 Board" >}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template"%}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      <int>
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "<number>", 
        "name": "<your-analog-name>"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "<your-board-name>",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Example" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "attributes": {
    "pins": [
      15
    ],
    "analogs": [
      {
        "pin": "34",
        "name": "sensor"
      }
    ]
  },
  "depends_on": [],
  "model": "esp32",
  "name": "board",
  "type": "board"
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.
Click **Save config**.

> The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The following attributes are available for `esp32` boards:
```

Use [the Micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git) to create a new Micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-robot-template.git
```

You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.
To obtain this:

* Navigate to [your new robot's](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#create-a-new-robot) page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Click on the **Setup** tab.
Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default.
* Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab.
The micro-RDK needs this JSON file, which contains your robot part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
* Paste the `viam-server` config into your terminal when prompted.

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

### Upload the Micro-RDK to your ESP32

> Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, upload the project to connect to your ESP32 and remotely control it live on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com):
```

---
title: "Microcontroller Setup: the Micro-RDK"
linkTitle: "Microcontroller Setup"
weight: 50
no_list: true
type: docs
image: "installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"
imageAlt: "E S P 32 - espressif"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/esp32-espressif.png"]
description: "Set up the Espressif ESP32 with the micro-RDK."
aliases:
    - /installation/microcontrollers

# SMEs: Nicolas Menard

---

{{% readfile "/static/include/micro-rdk.md" %}}

## Get Started

Follow these steps to install and build the micro-rdk on your ESP32:

1. Install the [required software](#software-requirements)

> 2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) with Viam's [Canon CLI utility](#use-viams-canon-cli-utility) *(recommended)* or [manually](#set-up-development-environment-manually)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Set up your development enviroment](#set-up-your-development-enviroment) with Viam's Canon CLI utility *(recommended)* or manually
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Then, install `dfu-util`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install dfu-util
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install `Rust`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

#### Install `cargo-generate` with `cargo`

 `cargo` installs automatically when downloading Rust with rustup.

Run the following command to install `cargo-generate`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

## Set up your development enviroment

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Canon CLI (recommended)" %}}

### Use Viam's Canon CLI utility

> [Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker-based canonical environment.

Reviewer 5: I think this could be simplified by just telling people to install canon by following the install instructions on the canon README itself and linking that. https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon#installation 

That section in turn links to the docker install instructions. This would also mean that if canon install instructions change or are updated, this doc won't become outdated.

Reviewer: @Otterverse -- @npentrel and I discussed this and we were thinking the docs should live in one place, so we might want to keep this here and update that readme to circle to viam docs?

Reviewer: and for your remaining feedback/comments above, leaving that up to Nico as unsure, but noted and will address!

Reviewer 5: Okay, let me know when that's addressed and I'll re-review. Thanks!

Author: If you can take a look that would be much appreciated

Canon requires a working installation of Docker Engine.

[Install Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running Docker Engine on Linux, make sure that you go through the [post installation steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/) to run Docker automatically on startup.

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Reviewer 5: Nothing is specific to "ubuntu" for canon. It works equally on all linux distros.

Reviewer: done!

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.
Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

> go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest

Reviewer 5: The homebrew install method (brew install canon) works on linux as well as MacOS. Likewise, the "go install ..." method here works on MacOS too. Why show different install instructions between OSes?

Reviewer 5: So the other changes here look fine by me. I still think it's odd to have different install methods. Maybe the tabs should be "Direct Go Install (Linux/MacOS)" and "Homebrew (Linux/MacOS)" since either method works for either OS.

Author: Given that each linux distribution has its own package manager I don't want users to be forced to use Homebrew. Installing go via the command line seems the least invasive and relatively easy to revert if something goes wrong, the user would have to figure out how to install golang for their particular distro

Reviewer 5: Yeah, I'm not saying remove either, just relabel them. Let the user's choose which method they prefer. If you already have homebrew installed, it's easier than trying to figure out how to install go. If you already have go, it's easier than trying to install homebrew. :-) But as noted, not blocking on this either way.

Reviewer 5: All good now that I see your latest changes. Sorry for the cross talk. I should've just waited 10 more minutes to reply. :-)

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

Make sure your system has [Go 1.19](https://golangtutorial.dev/news/go-1.19-version-released/#major-changes-in-go-119-version) or later installed.

> Verify your version of Go with `go version`.

Reviewer 5: This only applies/matter for the direct "go install" method of installation.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/doc/gopath_code) by running:

> `export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin`.

Reviewer 5: This is only needed for the "go install" installation method, and not needed for homebrew (installing homebrew will have already set the user up with the correct PATH)

Author: Given that each linux distribution has its own package manager I don't want users to be forced to use Homebrew. Installing go via the command line seems the least invasive and relatively easy to revert if something goes wrong, the user would have to figure out how to install golang for their particular distro

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Manual" %}}

### Set up development environment manually

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
You only need to follow these steps if you are not using Canon to build the micro-RDK.

> If you have completed your [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#use-viams-canon-cli-utility), skip this section and continue to [install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have completed your [set up with Canon](/installation/prepare/microcontrollers/#set-up-your-development-environment), skip this section and continue to [install the Micro-RDK](#install-the-micro-rdk).
```

## Software Requirements

The micro-RDK is written in Rust.

We recommend using Viam's [Canon utility](#using-canon) to build the `micro-rdk` server, as the utility downloads and installs a Docker development environment automatically.
You can set up the development environment manually by following [these instructions](#setting-up-development-environment-manually).

To use the micro-RDK with your ESP32 board, follow these steps:

- [Install prerequisites](#install-prerequisites)

If using the Docker environment with Canon:

- [Use Canon](#using-canon)

If setting up the environment yourself:

> - [Set up development environment manually](#setting-up-development-environment-manually)

Reviewer: opt / can add this in if you choose to change the heading

> - [Set up development environment manually](#setting-up-development-environment-manually)

Author: yeah it's better

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-generate
```

#### Install `espflash`

Run the following command to install `espflash`

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espflash
```

### Using Canon

Canon is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.
See [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) for more information.
It needs  a working installation of docker follow [Docker Installation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) to install Docker. If running linux make sure to go throught the post installation [steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/)

#### Homebrew

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

#### Direct Install

Go 1.19 or newer must be installed.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

Make sure your GOBIN is in your PATH. If not, you can add it with something like: `export PATH="$PATH:~/go/bin"` Note: This path may vary. See [Go](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install) for details.

> ### Setting up development environment manually

Author: done

> #### Install dependencies

Reviewer: @npmenard is this the only section that is intended to be part of the new "Setting up development environment manually" info? I'm a bit confused about the transition from that to installing the ESP-IDF steps, so some more clarification here could be good

Author: I change the name to `Install build decencies` to make it a bit clearer. We need this tools to build the project without the Docker image (the docker has all these tools already installed)

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

#### Install ESP-IDF

ESP-IDF is the development framework for Espressif SoCs (System-on-Chips), supported on Windows, Linux and macOS.
You need to install it to be able to install the micro-RDK on your Espressif ESP32 microcontroller.

Clone Viam's fork of the ESP-IDF:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
mkdir -p ~/esp
cd ~/esp
git clone --depth 1 -b v4.4.4 --single-branch --recurse-submodules --shallow-submodules https://github.com/npmenard/esp-idf
```

Then, install the required tools for ESP-IDF:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cd ~/esp/esp-idf
./install.sh esp32
```

To activate ESP-IDF, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
```

To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
Save this command to run in any future terminal session where you need to activate the ESP-IDF development framework.

#### Install the Rust ESP Toolchain and Activate the ESP-RS Virtual Environment

> Firstly install the following tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, install the following tools with `cargo`: 
```
or something like that?

Author: 👍

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install espup
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install cargo-espflash v2.0.0-rc.1
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo install ldproxy
```

Finally to download and install the esp-rs toolchain run :

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
espup install -s -f ~/esp/export-rs.sh -v 1.67.0
```

To activate the ESP Rust toolchain, run the following command to source (`.`) the activation script `export-rs.sh`:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export-rs.sh
```

> Similarly to ESP-IDF to avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid conflicts with other toolchains, adding this command to your `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` is not recommended.
```
I don't think we need the esp-idf note bc they won't have read it yet. Might just be confusing xtra

Author: agreed

## Install the Micro-RDK

To install the Micro-RDK on your ESP32 board:

- [create a new robot in the Viam app](#create-a-new-robot)
- [generate a new project from Viam's micro-RDK template](#generate-a-new-project-from-the-micro-rdk-template)
- [upload the project to your ESP32](#upload-and-connect-to-your-esp32-board)

### Create a New Robot

Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot in your desired location.
Keep your `Mode` and `Architecture` selections at default, and skip the instructions in the **Setup** tab for now as the setup instructions there are not for microcontrollers.

### Generate a New Project from the Micro-RDK Template

Use [the micro-RDK template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git) to create a new micro-RDK project to upload to your ESP32 by running:

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk-template.git
```

If you would like, you can use `mkdir` to initialize a new repository in the directory you created by running `cargo-generate`, to track any changes you make to the generated project.

> You will be prompted to paste your Viam robot configuration information (`viam.json`) into the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be prompted to paste your robot's JSON configuration into the terminal.
```
Opt but I think the viam.json note might be less helpful w the info immediately following

Author: 👍

To obtain this, navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click the **Copy viam-server config** button on the right side of the **Setup** tab of your robot.
The Micro-RDK uses the config for communication with the Viam app.
Paste this into your terminal.

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}

All of the generated files should be safe to commit as a project on Github, with the exception of `viam.json`, since it contains a secret key.

{{% /alert %}}

### Upload and Connect to your ESP32 Board

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Using Canon" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
canon bash -lc "make build-esp32-bin"
make flash-esp32-bin
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Local environment" %}}

> Make sure you have sourced `. ~/dev/esp/export-rs.sh` and `. ~/dev/esp/esp-idf/export.sh` prior running the following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you have sourced `. ~/dev/esp/export-rs.sh` and `. ~/dev/esp/esp-idf/export.sh` before running the following command: 
```
"sourced" could be confusing to some but I can't think of a better way to phrase

Author: we can use run I agree it sounds better

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
make upload
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> While running above commands, you may be presented with an interactive menu of different serial port options to use to connect to the ESP32 board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While running the above commands, you may be presented with an interactive menu of different serial port options to use to connect to the ESP32 board.
```
Why is it may? If it is `will` we can change to that, if not might wanna explain

Author: I removed it I don't think it is too critical

If successful you will retain a serial connection to the board until `Ctrl-C` is pressed.
To manage this connection, consider running it within a dedicated terminal session, or under `tmux` or `screen`.

> While the serial connection is live, you can also restart the currently flashed image with `Ctrl-R`.

Reviewer: good info

If everything went well, your ESP32 will be programmed so that you will be able to see your robot live and connect to it on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

### Troubleshooting

> If you run into the following error `Failed to open serial port` when flashing your esp32 with linux, make sure the user is added to the group `dialout` with `sudo gpasswd -a $USER dialout`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run into the error `Failed to open serial port` when flashing your ESP32 with Linux, make sure the user is added to the group `dialout` with `sudo gpasswd -a $USER dialout`
```

Also what user? This seems like more info could help but I haven't done this step so it might be super obvious 😆 (opt)

Author: this is a shortcut to the current user in bash felt a bit easier that to suggest to substitute the username in the command

cargo install espflash
```

> ### Using Canon to build micro-rdk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use Canon to build Micro-RDK
```

[Canon](https://github.com/viamrobotics/canon) is a CLI utility for managing a Docker based canonical environment.
Canon requires a working installation of docker.
[Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) before proceeding.
If you are running linux, make sure to go through the post installation [steps](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Linux (Ubuntu)" %}}

Go 1.19 or newer must be installed.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go install github.com/viamrobotics/canon@latest
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="macOS" %}}

> ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

Reviewer 2: We need to list Homebrew as a prerequisite

brew install viamrobotics/brews/canon
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> Make sure your the GOBIN folder is in your PATH. If not, you can add like this: `export PATH="$PATH:~/go/bin"` Note: This path may vary. See [Go](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install) for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to [add the go binary folder to your `PATH`](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-install).
```

### Set up development environment manually

> These steps are optional if you are using the canon utility to build the micro-rdk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only follow these steps if you are not using the Canon utility to build the Micro-RDK.
```
